---
layout: post
title: "Mapping as Meaning Making"
categories: misc
---
	This week, with the end of term fast approaching, I decided to switch my focus from absorbing DH material to brainstorming how I might begin to contribute to the field with me first endeavor in crafting a DH project. In considering what DH skill I wanted to learn or strengthen through the creation of this project, mapping and in particular mapping with ArcGIS first came to mind. 

	This term, as part of the Digital Integration Teaching Initiative shared with the NULabs and CSSH faculty, I was lucky enough to both assist in teaching digital skills to undergraduate students at Northeastern as well as to attend a few trainings in line with these classroom partnerships. As a part of Professor Denise Garcia’s undergraduate course, the talented Professor Bahare Sanaie-Movahed held a workshop on ArcGIS mapping where she provided access to this impressive software to all who attended. In this workshop professor Bahare focused on mapping areas around Boston but provided a glimpse into how this software could be used to map throughout the world. 

 	With my interest in mapping software sparked, I began to think about what kind of a dataset I wanted to work with. Professor Bahare explained in her tutorial that any mapping dataset would require the latitude and longitude of a given location and that most datasets provided additional information in excel as a means of record keeping. As a current research fellow for the ECDA, I had been exposed to various materials in the archive and thought it might be meaningful to use these resources to create my dataset. To ensure that my project would be beneficial to and in line with the ECDA’s vision, I decided to reach out to our project coordinator, Avery Blankenship, to discuss options. Always knowledgeable and eager to advise, Avery introduced me to the hundreds of newspaper clippings of the Barbados Mercury Runaway Slave ads, which she explained the ECDA clipped and compiled over the last two years. 

In sifting through the numerous slave ad clippings in the archive, I began to notice that most ads ranged in time from the late 1700’s to the early 1800’s and included the names of enslaved individuals being sought after, owners of the slaves, a location of where to bring slaves if found and the reward that would be provided for returning the sought after individuals mentioned. Although most ads provided the for-mentioned information, some did not provide the name of the estate or plantation that the slave belonged to, which would make mapping the path of a runaway more difficult. Given the inconsistent data provided in each ad, I decided I would record all place names mentioned in my excel sheet and indicate in the metadata whether the location was part of the runaway slaves pathway or if it was rather an extra location. 

In thinking of how I was going to locate the latitude and longitude for each location mentioned in the ads, the major challenge I could foresee was in locating these estates and plantations that either no longer exist or no longer exist under the same title. To assist with this locating process, I have found three main sites that list extensive data on the locations of plantations and estates in Barbados; UCL’s Legacies of British Slave-ownership database, Wikipedia’s list of plantations in Barbados and the Digital Library of the Caribbean’s extensive newspaper database. In particular, UCL’s site appears to have the most useful information for this project as it maps estates of British slave-owners in Jamaica, Barbados and Grenada. The database also lists all known estate owners of any given estate, which may be helpful in locating the address of a listed slave owner who’s address/ estate name is not mentioned in the ad. 

My hope, in thinking about the impact of this project, is that by tracing the various paths that enslaved individuals took to attempt to obtain freedom, their journeys will be brought to life in a way that text (newspaper clippings) fails to. In addition, by placing the paths of these individuals together on a map, their journeys will be put into conversation with one another, allowing perhaps new incites or patterns to be drawn. 

Two projects that have inspired this runaway slave ad narrative mapping initiative are those of Vincent Brown’s mapping of slave revolts in Jamaica http://revolt.axismaps.com/ and Dr Olly Ayers Mapping Black London project https://dcrn.northeastern.edu/home/mapping-black-london-in-world-war-ii/ . With Vincent Brown’s project focusing on Jamaica from 1760-1761 and Dr Olly Ayers project focusing on London from 1935-1947, I feel this particular mapping project would bring forth new information while taking advantage of a similar narrative-mapping model. I am not yet sure how I would like to display slave narratives or what these narratives will look like, but I imagine that by exploring these two magnificent mapping projects and digging deeper into the ECDA archives I will be able to find a way to infiltrate metadata on the descriptions of the slaves mentioned in the ads or perhaps their owner history (which is mentioned in quite a few ads) in a relevant and meaningful way. 
