---
layout: post
title: "Experimenting with Text as Data"
categories: misc
---
Last week having concluded that the digital has more to offer to the field of the humanities than to detract, I decided this week to share my experience exploring two open access DH tools that can be used generatively within the humanities field, Voyant and Google Ngram viewer. Introduced to me in the fifth lab of this term, Text as Data, I prepared to use these two GUI’s (graphical user interfaces) by selecting a text from Project Gutenberg that I had not yet read but that was of interest to me, The Scarlet Letter.

Over the years I have gathered a general understanding for what the themes, characters and plot elements of The Scarlet Letter are, but I was curious to see what new information the GUI’s would surface. To get started, I copied and pasted the entire novel of The Scarlet Letter into Voyant (an open-source, web-based application for performing text analysis). After clicking the “reveal” button, I was immediately presented with representations of the text via graph, cirrus, term popularity, word links, correlations, context, bubbliness and much more. 

The cirrus view option initially caught my eye as it presented colorful images of key terminology within The Scarlet Letter in a “cloud like” art display. The words in the cirrus were presented in a variety of sizes with the most popular terms depicted the largest and the least popular the smallest. Unsurprisingly, the largest words were those of key character names where as the smaller words were largely key descriptors such as old, little and long. A few medium sized nouns were also present in the cirrus such as minister, letter and scarlet. 

Next, I decided to click on the “terms” option next to cirrus, which presented me with a vast list of popular words from The Scarlet Letter. Examining the list I discovered that the words were listed in order of popularity with the exact number of times they appeared in the text next to them.  I found this presentation of word popularity to be a bit more telling than the cirrus presentation as it was harder to tell at times which words were bigger than others in the cirrus view. Each word in the terms view was accompanied by a box that once checked would graph the popularity of said word on the neighboring graph. To try this out, I checked boxes for the terms evil, moral and shame and found that shame appeared very frequently in the beginning of the text and died off towards the end where as evil occurred rather infrequently at the beginning of the text and had a much larger presence towards the end of the novel. Moral, in contrast, had a steady yet less prevalent existence throughout the entirety of the text. 

The next text view option “links” offered a third way of viewing The Scarlett Letter text by depicting the words once again in size based on popularity and then connecting words with strong relations to one another with a line. I enjoyed the visual format of viewing the text in links view as it helped to shed light on which characters might have relationships with one another as well as what characteristics these characters have. One example was how the word “mother” linked to both “child” and “little” but “child” connected to “mother” “little” and “pearl.” I could imagine the visual representation of these word connections being useful in brainstorming paper topics or providing someone who hasn’t read a given text with a brief introduction of major themes. 

The second GUI tool I used to explore The Scarlett Letter text was the Google Ngram Viewer. Unlike Voyant, the Ngram Viewer only allows users to enter a few terms at a time that once entered, are graphed by how frequently they appeared in corpuses over the years. Sticking with the three words I explored in Voyant (evil, moral and shame), I entered these into the Ngram viewer to explore their popularity from the time that the plot of The Scarlett Letter took place to today (1642-2019). I was surprised to find that the word “evil” had a large presence in corpuses from 1640-1716 with peak popularity in 1677 (.019%). Moral, in contrast, did not appear frequently from 1640 to the 1700’s (.001%) but gained momentum in the 1800’s peaking in 1835 with .012% popularity. Finally the word “shame” had a lower but more consistent presence throughout the centuries in texts, with peak popularity in the 1800’s (.007%) and the lowest popularity today (.0049%).  

I found the Ngram graph to be a helpful tool for situating terminology within a given time period. By first using the Voyant term graph to discover the popularity of a term within its text and then using the Ngram graph to discover the popularity of that term within an array of corpuses throughout time, when used together I found these GUI’s can provide a great deal of context for societies interests in certain topics. 

Looking at the term “moral” for example, Google Ngram’s results showed that this word experienced peak popularity around the 1850’s, the exact time that Hawthorne published The Scarlett Letter. In addition, the term “evil” was most popular in corpuses around the 1650’s, the exact time of the plot of The Scarlett Letter.

	In reflecting on my exploration of Voyant and Google Ngram viewer, I am pleased to say that I can see myself using these tools in the future to gain a broader perspective on the social context and inner connections of a given body of text before delving into close reading. Both Voyant and Google Ngram viewer presented the text of The Scarlett Letter to me in ways that expanded my understanding of the plot and timeframe of the text. After having worked with these two GUI’s I am both curious to read The Scarlett Letter as well as to analyze the data of the text further with other text analysis tools. 

